---
layout: post
title: Elementary Sorts
category: 算法
tags: "Algorithm"
---
@(6_Algorithms)
# 2.1 Elementary Sorts
In this section, two elementary sorting methods (selection sort and insertion sort) and a variation of them (shellsort) are introduced.

## 2.1.0 Rule of the game
> Algorithms for rearranging arrays of item where each item contains a ***key***. The objective is to rearrange the items such that their keys are in ascending order. In java, the abstract notion of ***key*** is captured in a built-in mechanism--the $Comparable$ interface.

> * Sorting cost model
> 分析排序算法的cost model时，计算compares和exchanges的次数（如果算法没有exchange，则计算array accesses的次数）。

> * Extra memory
> 可以将算法分成两个基本类型：
1. those that sort in place
2. those that need enough extra memory to hold another copy of array to be sorted

> * Types of data
> 对实现Java [$Comparable$](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/lang/Comparable.html) 接口的任何类型数据都可以通过sort算法排序。实现$Comparable$接口意味着有`compareTo()`方法。当调用`v.compareTo(w)`时，返回一个Integer，an integer that is **negative, zero, or positive** when $v < w, v = w, or\ v > w,$ respectively.

eg. [Date.java](https://algs4.cs.princeton.edu/21elementary/Date.java.html)

---
## 2.1.1 Selection sort
**Step**
> 1. First, find the smallest item in the array, and exchange it with the first entry;
> 2. Then, find the next smallest item and exchange it with the second entry;
> 3. Continue in this way until the entire array is sorted.

> This method is called ***selection sort*** because it works by repeatedly selecting the smallest remaining item.
 
[Selection.java](https://algs4.cs.princeton.edu/21elementary/Selection.java.html)

---
## 2.1.2 Insertion sort
> Insert each into its proper place among those already sorted.
> **Position**
* For randomly ordered arrays of length N with distinct keys, **insertion sort** uses $\sim N^{2}/4$ compares, and $\sim N^{2}/4$ changes on the average;
* The worst case is $\sim N^{2}/2$ compares, and $\sim N^{2}/2$ changes;
* The best case is $\sim N-1$ compares, and 0 changes;

简单理解就是，`a[0, 1, ...m, i-1]`是sorted，将`a[i]`插到`a[0, 1, ...m, i-1]`使新形成的array`a[0, 1, ...m, i]`也是sorted。

[Insertion.java](https://algs4.cs.princeton.edu/21elementary/Insertion.java.html)

---
## 2.1.3 Shellsort
> Shellsort is a simple extension of insertion sort that gains speed by allowing exchanges of entries that are far apart, to produce partially sorted arrays that can be efficiently sorted, eventually by insertion sort. The idea is to rearrange the array to give it the property that taking every $h^{th}$ entry (starting anywhere) yields a sorted sequence.
> **Property.** The number of compares used by shellsort with the increments 1, 4, 13, 40, 121, 364, ... is bounded by a small multiple of N times the number of increments used.
> **Proposition.** The number of compares used by shellsort with the increments 1, 4, 13, 40, 121, 364, ... is $O(N^{3/2})$

[Shell.java](https://algs4.cs.princeton.edu/21elementary/Shell.java.html)